# Data Description
There will be three datasets involved with the research: long-term count data, mark-recapture and physiological measurement data, and environmental data. The long-term count dataset is composed of observational survey data in the form of paper survey datasheets and in a spreadsheet (.CSV format). The data are collected during fixed time periods, unlimited detection radius, stationary point count surveys along previously established routes. This follows three decades of identical surveys conducted by the principal investigator (PI). The mark-recapture and physiological measurement dataset will be composed of bird capture data and effort data and will exist as paper datasheets and in a spreadsheet (.CSV format). These data are gathered during netting sessions in which birds are safely captured, marked with a unique identifier (a metal leg band with a numeric combination), and numerous quantitative and qualitative measurements are taken. The environmental dataset will be composed of georeferenced observational data collected by environmental remote sensors and will exist as a spreadsheet (.CSV format). These sensors will be distributed across the study site and will automatically record temperature, humidity, and dew point, among other variables. R Studio will be used to analyze data and to wrangle all datasets into analyzable, exportable, and shareable formats. 

It is anticipated that the long-term count dataset will be largest (1-2 GB), followed by the mark-recapture and physiological measurement dataset (~500 MB), and the environmental data  (<100 MB). 

# Roles and responsibilities
The graduate researcher is tasked with drafting and submitting the data management plan to the PI for review and any potential revisions; the PI will also ensure the plan is followed. All data collection in Panama will be a joint effort by the graduate researcher, PI, and any other parties that may be involved. Other data collection, such as work with specimens and monitoring of environmental sensors will be the responsibility of the graduate researcher. The individuals to conduct field work or experiments that involve equipment will be responsible for any required maintenance and calibration. Following data collection, it is the responsibility of the graduate researcher to manage, organize, and ensure the quality of the data. Data entry of any hard copies of data sheets will fall to the graduate researcher. The PI and graduate research will both be responsible for archiving data in a data repository and analyzing or manipulating the data. In the case a primary researcher involved with the project leaves, the PI will take over any responsibility they had.

# Data standards and metadata
The Darwin Core Archive metadata standardization methods will be implemented for the long-term count data and mark-recapture and physiological measurement data, as it is highly recommended by Dryad and other biodiversity data repositories and journals for species occurrence data. No metadata standard will be used in the documentation of the environmental dataset; see below for more details. Below is the metadata documentation plan:

Dataset 1: long-term count data. This tabular dataset is composed of raw paper datasheets and a digital FileMakerPro database. Once entered, datasheets will be organized and labeled by day completed (YYYYMMDD), and sorted so that each folder contains stacks of datasheets with each day’s worth of data paper-clipped together and ordered chronologically. After each entry session, FileMaker database files will be labeled countdataYYYYMMDD.csv. Metadata associated with each survey will be documented with each individual entry into the database (see example), and will include date and time of survey, observer, exact location of survey (in decimal degrees to the fifth decimal place), name of location, and serial number of entry. All metadata will be collected during surveys, with the exception of serial number which will be automatically generated upon entry into the main database. A readme file is associated with this database which documents and describes each data and metadata field.

Dataset 2: mark-recapture and physiological measurement data. This tabular dataset is composed of raw paper datasheets and a digital FileMakerPro database. Once entered, datasheets will be scanned (digital copies labeled as projectcode_bandsize_YYYYMMDD_pagenumber; scans will be saved on the graduate researcher’s personal computer and backed up to a shared Box folder), and sorted by band size and then date. After each entry session, database .CSV files will be labeled banddataYYYYMMDD.csv. Metadata associated with each banding effort will be documented on journal datasheets with a separate database (following a similar naming and version control scheme). Metadata fields include data, hours of operation, personnel present, net open and close times, and location. These metadata will be collected at the end of each capture effort. Two readme files are associated with this banding and effort database which document and describe each data and metadata field.

Dataset 3: environmental data. This tabular dataset is only composed of digital data downloaded directly from environmental sensors. No version control will be used as minimal changes will be made to this dataset. Metadata will be collected automatically by sensor units and will include location and time period of data collection. A readme file is associated with this database which documents and describes each data and metadata field.

# Storage and security
No human subjects are involved, and therefore no measures to protect such data are in place. Furthermore, sensitive information pertaining to critically threatened or endangered, heavily harvested, or otherwise sought after birds that may be at jeopardy following the release of pertinent data will not be collected, and therefore no protective measures will be in place. 

During field seasons, unentered datasheets will be kept in a secure, waterproof bag or container indoors at the study site. An effort will be made to enter and back-up data collected in Panama prior to travel back to the U.S. to ensure it is not damaged or lost at the field site or during travel. Any raw datasheets that have not been entered will be stored in a secure office on the Oregon State University Corvallis campus. 

Data will exist in four forms: raw datasheets, digitized datasheets, database, and backed-up Cloud database. Following entry into a FileMaker database on the graduate researcher’s personal computer, the data sheets will be photographed or digitized and those files will be uploaded to a shared Box folder. The raw data sheets will be organized and stored in a secure location known by the PI and graduate researcher. Each time data is entered into the database, a new version will be uploaded to the same shared Box folder. Data that never existed in a paper format, such as environmental data, will be stored in two forms: on the graduate researcher’s personal computer and the shared Box folder. All data will also be backed-up on an external hard drive in the possession of the graduate researcher. All data processing will be manually completed. Following completion of the project, all data saved on the Cloud will be archived by the PI in a publicly accessible data repository. 

# Access and data sharing
There are no factors or potentially sensitive information included that restrict or limit the sharing of these data. We plan to make these data available at the same time that any derivative of them is submitted for publication or within two years following the completion of all data collection. All data will be submitted to Dryad, a publicly accessible biodiversity data repository with no pay walls. Dryad is a well-established repository for biodiversity data, especially for avian data, with CoreTrustSeal certification, indefinite data retention, a robust succession plan, and is open-access. All data submitted to Dryad will be as tabular data in .CSV format; the environmental data will be also submitted as georeferenced shapefiles. Data published in Dryad will be under a  CC0 1.0 Universal (CC0 1.0) Public Domain Dedication license, allowing the reuse, modification, and publication of any derivatives. Datasets submitted to Dryad will be reviewed by curators that ensure the data is formatted to maximize preservation and reusability and will receive a DOI. Additionally, a data paper describing the data, metadata, exact methodologies, and other details will also be submitted to Biodiversity Data Journal, which will be published under a CC BY 4.0 license, allowing the distribution and adaptation of the work as long as it is cited. Ideally all three datasets would be submitted together, however, if this was not possible owing to logistical or time constraints, then each datasets would be submitted to Dryad or another repository separately. If the dataset warrants a data paper of its own, then this would also be done.

# Archiving and preservation
Digital data will be preserved indefinitely in the repository or until the repository dissolves. Paper datasheets will be digitized and stored in a shared Box folder; raw datasheets will be kept for five years following the conclusion of the project. In addition to archiving and preserving the tabular data in a publicly accessible repository, with associated details published in a data journal, both the digital data and hard copies of paper datasheets will be archived and preserved by the researchers. Digital data will be saved on an external hard drive. Paper data will be sorted chronologically, and stored in a cool, dry, secure location. 
